---
layout: post
title:  "stream of consciousness 1"
date:   2017-11-12 14:38:35 -0800
---

*Note: Read the contents of each link before continuing the essay. I'm not going to spend time explaining ideas that other people have already explained.*

The world is changing more rapidly than ever before. CRISPR, Bitcoin, containerization of systems, software radios, cheaper microprocessors, increased GPU energy efficiency, affordability, and power, machine learning techniques being utilized across scientific fields to generate faster progress, balkanization of states (revolutionary urges seen in Catalonia, California, Ireland, UK), decreased government ability to collect taxes (IRS notes that only 900 Coinbase users have filed their crypoassets), large financial institutions are being hacked into causing loss of public faith (Equifax), and quantum computing is moving towards commercial viability rapidly as qudits with stable states were created for the first time over the summer.

It's difficult to overstate how massively these innovations will impact the world and how we live in it. It is difficult to see how these changes tie together, or to translate the mindset of the 20th century to the 21st century Information Age. I recommend starting by reading [Breaking Smart](https://www.breakingsmart.com/).

Marx created a model of society called [Historical Materialism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Historical_materialism#Key_ideas). Take a look at point 5.

> Society moves from stage to stage when the dominant class is displaced by a new emerging class, by overthrowing the "political shell" that enforces the old relations of production no longer corresponding to the new productive forces. This takes place in the superstructure of society, the political arena in the form of revolution, whereby the underclass "liberates" the productive forces with new relations of production, and social relations, corresponding to it.

When productive forces change, the political superstructure of government and the relations of wealth and power change drastically. In the rise of the Information Age, this is occurring faster than ever before. Humans can count the number of radical shifts in productive forces available to them on one hand: the Agricultural Revolution, the Industrial Revolution, the Information Revolution. We are at the infancy of the third, most radical event in the history of humanity. Society will continue to change at an accelerating rate, regardless of human intervention. Shifting the forces of production from being based on industry to information will cause cultural and societal revolution.

In the book *Guns, Germs, and Steel*, a thesis is presented on how societies develop over time. It amounts to the following:
1. Humans cohabitate in an egalitarian fashion in a permanent place, which we shall refer to as a village.
2. The population of the village increases beyond the [Dunbar Number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunbar%27s_number).
3. When any individual cannot have a meaningful relationship with every person in his/her village, violence becomes harder to prevent.
4. A single group within the village creates a monopoly on violence and forces everyone else in the village to be peaceable, else they die.
5. The village creates increasingly sophisticated hierarchies of power as the size of the village grows, and specialization of labor begins to occur, enforced by those with a monopoly on violence.
6. The village that is most effective at committing violence eradicates the surrounding villages, allowing it to utilize more natural resources and grow larger.

All societies have arisen out of a similar model. The logic of how violent exchanges end defines the history of humanity and how societies have come to exist in their current form.

> ex: The United States government has a monopoly on violence (nuclear weapons and a standing army). The United States is the most effective society in the world at committing large-scale acts of violence, and uses this power to instate favorable trade relations which inflate the standard of living of its occupants above that of countries less capable of committing violence, despite the citizens of the United States not necessarily creating more value than citizens in other countries.

A knowledge worker in India is just as able to create value for the world as a knowledge worker in San Francisco. The only items required are a laptop and a connection to the Internet. This levels the economic playing field across the world, and makes nation-state protectionism irrelevant. The cognitive elite now have equal opportunity to create value and gain reward. Genius has been unleashed upon the world in every nation, as the tools for societal change have moved from the hands of those with guns to the hands of those with computers. It is impossible to predict what sort of society will be created, but in retrospect it will "be obvious" and become a part of the historical narrative we tell ourselves so we can all keep pretending the world makes sense (history is determined by surprises, see: *Black Swan by Nassim Taleb*).

As knowledge work begins to dominate the economy, those who are able to create value with their minds are no longer tied to geographic locations. As Tiebout foretold in his 1956 paper, [A Theory of Local Expenditures](https://www.unc.edu/~fbaum/teaching/PLSC541_Fall08/tiebout_1956.pdf), if people were able to more easily move between countries, market forces would be applied to governance structures. To be more explicit: governments will be held accountable to their constituents by market forces, and will be forced to treat them as customers that they are attracting rather than peasants that they protect. This over time will cause the public goods created by governments to more closely mirror collective preferences, as governments compete for tax dollars. The internet age is enabling Tiebout's future of reduced government control to be realized at a startling rate.
For more on this, see [The Network State](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KiLUPvUsdXg).

If you wish to know how the world is going to change, create the change. If you wish to wallow in increasing panic and uncertainty as your worldview continues to make less and less sense, keep doing what you're doing.

In the meantime, read *The Sovereign Individual* and [Mastering Bitcoin](https://github.com/bitcoinbook/bitcoinbook).
